**CMSI 3700** Interaction Design, Fall 2023

# LiftHer App Design Report

Assignment: Create a design for a website or app of your dreams. There are no limits of where your imagination can take you, so run wild with your ideas!

## Backstory

- I began my lifting journey the summer after I graduated high school, two and a half years ago. My club soccer career had ended and I needed an outlet for my physical and mental health. When I first started going to the gym, I would only use the treadmill as I did not know how to use any of the weight equipment, nor the correct form. I ended up asking one of my old, female soccer coaches for help. From here, I knew some of the basic movements but I still stuck to the weight machines. As my confidence developed and my drive to try free weights increased, I asked a girl my age who I always saw in the gym to teach me how to dead lift. As someone who was once a beginner looking for female role models in the gym, I wanted to create an app the would encourage women to lift and feel confident in entering the gym, a male-dominated space.
- Another reason I decided I wanted to create LiftHer is because I have not liked any interface of numerous different workout tracker apps I have tried. Other apps' interfaces are not organized in a user-friendly way and they also lack many of the features that I would deem necessary for my own enjoyment of such an app. I hope to create an app that will encourage women to lift and allow them to enjoy the experience of tracking their progress!

### Inspiration

- Most fitness apps for women utilize toxic vocabulary when it comes to working out. They rely on shaming the user into thinking that they need to use the app and make them aware of things that they did not know were "wrong" with their body. Additionally, most of the apps are trying to sell you their workout plans, which as someone who is already familiar with lifting, these apps are not tailored to my needs. I want my app to allow users to track their own workouts. Many of the other apps on the market only have at-home workout examples, I want my app to put more emphasis on the gym workouts. This is because I want my app to encourage women to lift in the male-dominated space that is the gym.
- StrongHer-Workout For Women App: This is a subscription based app that provides at home workout programs and in the gym programs. I really wanted to use this name for my app, but I saw that it already existed. I was inspired by the UI for this app. because it has the All of the workouts are provided and there is no way to track your own workout. The UI design is very user friendly with a clear layout and well designed components. StrongHer employs a pastel color palette that is very appealing to the eye and does not take away from using the app efficiently. I wanted my app to be darker in hues, but I was inspired by the pastel hues and layout. MY app also has a different functionality as StrongHer is not a workout tracking app.
- Strong Workout Tracker Gym Log App: This app is similar to the one I want to create. However, it is not catered towards females. It has example workout templates that are not beginner friendly and are only compound lifts. The UI is decent for this app, but it is very plain in color and has too much going on on the home page in terms of text.

- Setgraph App: The home page of this app is very plain; it only has a few icons, one component, and a footer. The majority of the screen is blank. The past workouts folder is not clearly organized which makes it challenging to visualize it. This app lacks many features and is too simple in its design and functionality.

## Designs and explanation

- Loading Screen
  I wanted to create an eye-catching loading screen that somehow incorporated the pink of my logo in a simple, but effective way. If this page were to be implemented, the pink along the border would be animated and would quickly go around the screen in a clockwise fashion. I utilized a Mobile App Figma template for each of my pages, in order to ensure they were all of the correct size for an IOS app and that they were consistent for all three pages I designed. The background color is a dark grey (#2F2F2F) as I did not want to use black as it looks unnatural and would overpower the other colors in my design. I utilized the Glow Plug-in on a rounded rectangle component to create the neon pink border. I then included the stacked version of my logo in the middle of the screen.
- Home Page: This was the most complicated page for my to design. Again, I used the same kind of frame across all three of my pages. This page utilizes the same dark grey color instead of black so that it does not overpower any of the elements on the page. A horizontal version of the logo is in the top left corner. In the right hand corner I have a hamburger menu icon for navigational purposes that would arise with the implementation of this app. The main element of this page that I would want the users to be drawn to is the calendar. I utilized the Handy Components Plug-in for creating the calendar and applied my own tweaks with regards to style and organization. I rounded the edges of the calendar component to be the same curvature as the corners of the phone screen. The calendar features a back and a forward arrow to navigate between months. It has a light grey fill color to stand out against the slightly darker grey fill of the calendar component. I wanted the calendar fill itself to be a decently light grey so that it would stand out against the background of the page. The calendar is organized in Monday through Sunday fashion instead of Sunday through Saturday fashion as Sunday is a very common rest day for most gym-goers and starting the week off with a rest day would not be visually appealing with as there would be nothing tracked. I put the "Push," "Pull", and "Legs" labels/buttons on the calendar to show what tracking your workout would look like. The user would have the ability to look back at past workouts by clicking on the label/button and make modifications, such as change the title of the workout, change label fill color (colorblind accessible), and even edit their workout information. Additionally, each element of the calendar and the page is separate, as I ensured by looking at the development tools on Figma. This means that a screen reader would be able to work well with my design. There is an "Add Session" button at the bottom of the page where users would be able to track their workout. All elements that are clickable I have designed with a drop shadow to highlight this function to the user. The last element of this page is the bottom navigation bar. I kept it simple by only having 3 icons, representing the three different pages of my app. All icons I used for my app design are from the Open Iconic Icon Set Plug-in. I have modeled the home screen and show that this is in fact the page I am on by making the Home icon the same pink color as that in my logo. This difference in icon color will signify to user what page they are looking at. The other two icons, the magnifying glass and user icon would allow users to search for different exercises and view their profile, respectively.
- Exercise Card Page: This page has the same background color as the other ones. It features a logo graphic in the top left corner, which is just the logo without the text. I opted for using this version as I did not want to clutter the page with text. This page demonstrates what adding a workout to your tracking session would look like. The date of said workout is clearly labeled above the image component. There is also an west pointing arrow within a dark grey circle component that would signal to the user its function to go back to the previous page. In implementation, this image would actually be a gif so that the user can see how the exercise is to be performed. I give image credits to Train Heroic's 2022 article titled "ROMANIAN DEADLIFTS (RDLS): THE ULTIMATE HAMSTRING EXERCISE FOR POSTERIOR CHAIN DEVELOPMENT." The image is rounded to the same degree of that as the screen. The exercise name along with the muscle group are featured below the image. These would ideally be information sourced from the Exercises DB API. The size of the image and white text of the exercise draw the user towards that information. The muscle group text is slightly darker in color. In the middle of the page is the text boxes where users would input the number of sets, reps, and weights used for the given exercise. The weight input section has a drop down menu for switching between pounds (imperial system) and kilograms (metric system). Below the input fields is the form information for performing the given exercise. I pulled this information from https://www.womenshealthmag.com/fitness/a20698895/romanian-deadlift-3/ , but there is an API that provides form information for a good majority of gym exercises. The text describing form has a linear gradient. As you can see the text gets closer to the grey of the background color. This design would signify to the user that they can scroll to keep reading. The last element of this page is the "Add Exercise" button. It is very simple and clearly labeled, yet does an efficient job of making its function known to the user. I tried to use the Sidekick Accessibility plug-in to add alt-text to the image on this page and it would not work without creating an account and subscribing.
- I included the mock ups of my logo in the repository too!

## Design process post-mortem

- As expected, I kept revising the pages and elements I wanted to design for this app. At first I wanted to make the home screen have rounded rectangular components containing an image and respective label of a muscle group. After much thought, I realized that is not how I wanted my home page layout to be and instead decided on creating a calendar. In that process I discovered how few calendar and plug-in widgets you can find from inside of Figma. One that I initially wanted to use would not let you scale its size so it was not going to fit inside the frame. I ended up having to research plug-ins through Google as the search tool in Figma was only hitting four results. Most of my time was spent figuring out formatting and stylizing the numerous elements on the home and exercise card page. Through the process of overcoming many design obstacles, I found what tools worked best for me and discovered how to properly use plug-ins to improve the aesthetics of my design.

## Heuristic description

- My mental model: Ideally, the users of this app would be women who want to lift. I researched many fitness apps, some specifically being targeted for women and others just for workout tracking. I saw a lack of color in most of the apps except for the ones catered towards women. I still wanted to include these vibrant colors in my own design while also having dark tones throughout all of the pages. I ensured that all of my elements were organized in a way that created balance on the page. I did not want elements becoming an eye sore because their colors were not cohesive with the rest of the page, they were misaligned, etc. The dark grey (instead of black) background color and the pink of my logo and many other elements create a nice contrast that is visually appealing and yet not too overwhelming. I always wanted to being able to look at a calendar and see what days I worked out for that month and what muscle groups did I hit at the gym. My app demonstrates this function perfectly! The icons I used are consistent with teh standard among other applications. The different icon color on the bottom navigation bar ensures the visibility of the system status, users will know exactly what page they are on. The back arrow function on the exercise card page allows for user control and freedom. Overall, my app includes numerous Jakob's Usability Heuristics that are relevant to my app's design and intended function.
- The two usability metrics that would be most relevant to my app would be efficiency and satisfaction. Are my users successfully able to track a session that requires them to add multiple exercises and input their set, rep, and weight information? I could test this by giving them a workout session with 5 exercises that were performed. Each exercise being performed a different amount of times at different weights. To make things challenging I could even ask them change the unit of weight to the non-default, kilograms. The second metric to access my app would be satisfaction. Do users enjoy using my app to track their workouts? I could send my users a simple survey asking about the color palette, readability, layout, etc.

## Statement of Work

I worked solo on this project, but I did collaborate with my mother, who is a freelance graphic designer, in designing my vision for the LiftHer logo. I also have to give the app's naming rights to my father as he came up with that name after I mentioned some of my initial ideas.
